# <div style="text-align: right"> January 28, 2020</div>

### Agenda:
- Linear Regression Cont'd
- Gradient Descent
    - Numeric Gradient
    - Analytic Gradient
### Homework:
- Solve Linear Regression Problem by Gradient Descent
---
## I. Linear Regression
- Main Idea
    - The obtained w should make the predictions of hw close to the true values of y.
- Define a measure of error function:
    - SSE, Sum of Squared Errors
---
## II. Gradient Descent
- Question:
    - "If we want to reach a global minimum, why not just directly jump to it? It's clearly visible on the plot?"
    - We would be blindly placed somewhere on the plot, having no idea what the landscape in front of us looks like, and we would have to navigate our way to a loss minimum without accidentally climbing to the top of a local maximum.
- Instead of relying on pure randomness, we need to define an optimization algorithm that allows us to literally improve W and b
- The gradient descent method is an iterative optimization algorithm that operates over a loss landscape (also called an optimization surface).
- Left:
    - The "naive loss" visualized as a 2D plot. 
- Right:
    - A more realistic loss landscape can be visualized as a bowl that exists in multiple dimensions. Our goal is to apply gradient descent to navigate to the bottom of this bowl (where there is low loss).
- Method 1:
    - Randomly initialize W and b, evaluate, and repeat over and over again, hoping that at some point we land on a set of parameters that obtains best fit?
---
## III. Numeric Gradient
- In 1- dimension, the derivative of a function:
```
    df(x)/dx = lim h-->0 [(f(x+h)-f(x))/h]
```
- Problems?
    - Approximation (Lim of h)
    - Painfully slow!
---
## IV. Analytic Gradient
- The second way to compute the gradient is analytically using calculus, which allows us to derive a direct formula for the gradient (no approximations) that is also very fast to compute. However, unlike the numerical gradient it can be more error prone to implement, which is why in practice it is very common to compute the analytic gradient and compare it to the numerical gradient to check the correctness of your implementation. 
    - This is called a gradient check.
---
## V. Python Basics
- Built-in Types and Expressions
    - Strings, lists, and tuples are all sequence types, so called because they behave like a sequence - an ordered collection of objects
    - Lists 
        - Are enclosed in square brackets ([ and ])
    - Tuples
        - Parentheses ((and)). 
#### Example:
```
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
["spam", "bungee", "swallow"]
(2, 4, 6, 8)
("two", "four", "six", "eight")
[("cheese", "queso"), ("red", "rojo"), ("school", "escuela")]
```
- The first example is a list of five integers.
- The next is a list of three strings.
- The third is a tuple containing four integers.
- Followed by a tuple containing four strings.
- The last is a list containing three tuples, each of which contains a pair of strings.
## Sequences
- Strings, Lists, and tuples are all sequence types, so called because they behave like a sequence - an ordered collection of objects.
- In Python:
    - sequence is the generic term for an ordered set.
    - There are several types of sequences in Python, the following three are the most important.
    - Lists:
        - The most versatile sequence type.
        - The elements of a list can be any onject, and lists are `mutable` (can be changed).
        - Elements can be reassigned or removed, and new elements can be inserted.
    - Tuples:
        - Are like lists, but they are `immutable` (can't be changed)
    - Strings:
        - A special type of sequence that can only be store `characters`, and they have a special notation.
        - However, all of the sequence operations described below can also be used on strings.
    - Useful Functions:
        - `len`(mySeq)
            - short of length
            - Returns the number of elements in the sequence mySeq
        - Searching:
            - `mySeq.index(x)`
                - returns the index of the first occurrence of x in mySeq.
                - Note that if x isn't in mySeq index will return an error. (use `in` with an if statement first to avoid this).
            - `min`(mySeq) and `max`(mySeq)
                - Return the smallest and largest elements of mySeq.
                - If the elements are strings this owuld be the first and last elements in lexicographic order (the order of words in a dictionary).
                - Note that if any two elements in mySeq are incomparable (a string and a number, for example), min and max will return errors.
            - `mySeq.count(x)`
                - Returns the number of occurrences of x in mySeq (that is, the number of elements in mySeq that are equal to x).
        - Sequence Indexing:
            - `indexing operator` ([])
                - Selects a single element from a sequence.
                - The expression inside brackets is called the `index`
                - Must be an integer value.
                - The index indicates which element to select, hence its name.
        - With lists and tuples, `len` returns the number of elements in the sequence
        - Since we are started counting at zero, the sixteen indices are numbered 0 to 15.
            - To get the last element, we have to subtract 1 from the length:
#### Example:
```
            last = seq[len(seq) - 1]
```
- For Loop:
    - Python's `for` loop makes traversal easy to express:
    - We will discuss looping in greater detail i nthe next chapter.
    - For now just note that the colon (:) at the end of the first line and the indentation on the second line are both required for this statement to be syntactically correct.
- Enumerate:
    - As the standard `for` loop traverses a sequence, it assigns each `value` in the sequence to the loop variable in the order it occurs in the sequence.
    - Sometimes it is helpful to have both the value and the index of each element.
    - The `enumerate` function gives us this:
#### Example:
```
fruits = ['apples', 'bananas', 'blueberries', 'oranges', 'mangos']

for index, fruit in enumerate(fruits):
    print("The fruit, " + fruit + ", is in position " + str(index) + ".")
```
## Sequence Slicing
- Slices:
    - a subsequence of a sequence is called a `slice` and the operation that extracts a subsequence is called `slicing`.
    - Like with indexing, we use square brackets ([]) as the slice operator, but instead of one integer value inside we have two, seperated by a colon(:):
#### Example:
```
>>> singers = "Peter, Paul, and Mary"
>>> singers[0:5]
'Peter'
>>> singers[7:11]
'Paul'
>>> singers[17:21]
'Mary'
>>> classmates = ("Alejandro", "Ed", "Kathryn", "Presila", "Sean", "Peter")
>>> classmates[2:4]
('Kathryn', 'Presila')
```
- The operator [n:m]
    - returns the part of the sequence from the n'th element to the m'th element, including the first but excluding the lsat.
    - This behavior is counter-intuitive; it makes more sense if you imagine the indices pointing between the characters.
    - Negative indexes are also allowed.
- `in` operator:
    - the `in` operator returns whether a given element is contained in a list or tuple
    - `in` works somewhat differently with strings.
    - it evalutes to `True` if one string is a substring of another.
- `Lists` are mutable
    - Unlike strings and tuples, which are immutable objects.
    - Lists are mutable, which means we can change thir elements.
    - Using the bracket operator on the left side of an assignment, we can update one of the elements:
    - `List Deletion`
        - Using slices to delete list elements can be awkward, and therefore error-prone.
        - Python provides an alternative that is more readable.
        - `del` removes an element from a list.
            - As you might expect, `del` handles negative indices and causes a runtime error if the index is out of range.
            - You can use a slice as an index for `del`
- Lists Methods
    - In addition to `count` and `index`, lists have several useful methods.
    - Since lists are mutable, these methods modify the list on which they are invoked, rather than return a new list.
---
## VI. Basic Data Types:
- Numbers:
    - Integers, "long" integers
        - "Plain" integers are at least 32 bits
        - "Long" integers are infinite precision
    - Floating Point Numbers
    - Complex numbers (not-so-usual)
- Number operations:
    - Sum (+)
    - Difference (-)
    - Product (*)
    - Division (/) or floor Division
    - Modulo (%), aka remainder; also applies to floats
    - Exponentiation (**)
        - Note:
            - The defiitions of `/` and `%` for negative numbers are slightly different than in C/C++ and Java, but all are consistent with the identity
- Boolean & ops
    - The usual; they're called `True` and `False` (note caps)
    - Operations:
        - Logical (short-circuit)
        - `and`, `or`, `not`
        - "Bitwise" (apply to ints too):
            - `&` (and), `|` (or), `~` (not)
    - Comparison expressions that return boolean:
        - Inequalities (order):
            - `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`
        - Equality: 
            - `==`, `!=`
        - Identity:
            - `is`, `is not`
        - Membership:
            - `in`
- `is`
    - It tests if two variables point to the same object, not if two variables have the same value.
- `None`
    - Special data type with just one value;
        - `null` (Java)
        - `NULL` (C/C++; sort of)
    - Denotes a missing/invalid/empty value
    - Nothing equals `None`, except `None` itself
    - It is an object
- `Strings`
    - Single or double quotes: usual backslash escapes
    - Strings are sequences (we'll see more on sequences later)
    - Multi-line:
        - The preferred way of wrapping long lines is by using Python's implied line continuation inside parentheses, brackets and braces.
        - If necessary, you can add an extra pair of parentheses around an expression, but sometimes using a backslash looks better.
        - Make sure to indent the continued line appropriately.

## Variables
- Everything is a reference
    - Even numbers...
    - Python uses the mechanism, know as call by object reference
- Valid Identifiers (Similar to most languages):
    - Any sequence of letters, underscores, and numbers
    - That starts with a letter or underscore (not a number)
    - (except for reserved words)
---
## VII. Introduction to Python Packages:
- Scientific Computing (NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlin, Pandas...)
### Numpy Overview:
- Python lacks (true) multidimensional arrays
    - Rectangular shape
    - Same type of elements
- NumPy fills that need
- Functionality is inspired by Matlab
- Using Numpy:
    - `import numpy`
    - `import numpy as np`
    - `from numpy import * `
        - Second and third way are most common
        - Some IDEs may already do that for you
            - But if you plan to run your code standalone, you need to `import`
- `Arrays`
    - An index position is called an axis (aka. dimension)
    - For 2D arrays:
        - 1st axis = rows
        - 2nd axis = columns (by convention)
    - Element type, e.g. float, int, bool, ...
---

