# <div style="text-align: right"> January 29, 2020</div>

## Schedule:
- Quiz 3
- Activity 1
- Context Free Grammar
- PL Evaluation
## Homework:
- Homework Handout #1 ---> Completed already, not submited yet.
---
## Quiz:
1. 
    - 
2. 
    - 
3.  A void method implemented in Java with a return statement is an example of a code that generates a...
    - Semantic Error
4. Which of the words can be generated from S?
    - S --> 0S|1S|S'
    - S' --> 01

        - `001001`
        - 000110
        - 010010
        - 010100 
---
## Review:
- 
---
## I. Formal Language Theory
- G is a context-free grammar if:
    - G = (V, T, P, S), where:
        - Any productions in P have the form:
        - A --> a, with:
            - A exists in V
            - a exists in (V u T)*
### Example:
    G = (V, T, P, S), where:
    V = {S}
    T = {a, b}
    P = {S --> aSb | S --> epsilon}
### Example:
    G = (V, T, P, E), Where:
    V = {E}
    T = {+. -, *, /, (,), x}
    P = {E --> E + E | E - E | E * E | E / E | (E) | X}
- Parse Tree:
    - Notation to show the derivation of words using a grammar's productions.
    - The Root of the tree is always the start symbol.
    - Intermediate nodes are always variables
    - Leaf nodes are terminals
### Example:
```
G = (V, T, P, S), where
V = {S}
T = {a, b}
P = {S --> aSb | S --> epsilon}

              S
            / | \
           a  S  b
            / | \
           a  S  b
            / | \
           a  S  b
              |
           epsilon
```
- Ambiguous Grammar:
    - A Context-free grammar is said to be ambiguous if there are more than one parse tree for a given word.
    - The Grammar below is ambiguouss (hint: try to generate different derivation trees for "x + x * x")
        -       
- Removing the ambiguity:
    - G = (V, {+, -, *, /, (, ), x}, P, E), where:
    - V = {E, T, F}
    - P = {E --> E + T | E - T | T,
        - T --> T * F | T / F | F,
        - F --> (E) | X}
    - F is called a "factor", an expression that cannot be "pulled apart"
    - T is called a "term", a product or quotient of factors
    - E is either a sum or a difference of an expression and a term.
---
## II. PL Evaluation
- What makes a good PL?
- Language evaluation criteria and the characteristics that affect them
    - Readability
    - Writability
    - Reliability
- `Readability` and the software crisis of the 70s
    - Software Development Life Cycle:
        - Requirements Analysis
        - Design
        - Development
        - Testing
        - Maintenance
 - `Writability`:
    - Measures how easy a PL can be used to create programs for a chosen problem domain
- `Reliability`:
    - A program is said to be reliable if it performs to its specifications under different conditions (e.g., different platforms, inputs, etc.)
    - The easier a program is to write, the more likely it is to be correct.
    - Programs that are difficult to read and are difficult both to write and modify
- `Simplicity`:
    - Number of Constructs
        - Large PLs often end up having overlooked features
    - Feature Multiplicity
        - Having more than one way to accomplish a particular operation
    - Operator Overloading
        - When a single operator has more than one meaning
        - How '+' works in Python when operands are lists?
        - How about when one operand is a list and the other is a scalar value?
    - Simple Languages are easier to learn
    - It should not be understood as less powerful
    - Be careful not to carry the concept too far
### Example:
    Java's "Double Brace Initialization" is a feature that allows writing expressions to create and initialize collections.
- `Orthogonality`:
    - A language is orthogonal if its features are built upon a small, mutually independent set of primitive operations
    - In other words, language features can be used in any combinations that make sense
    - Orthogonal languages are conceptually simple, having fewer exceptional rules
    - Examples of lack of orthogonality in C:
        - `Arrays` and `structs` are the only two structured data types available in C
        - Structs can be returned from functions
        - Arrays cannot
        - `void` is a type in C but you cannot use `void` in all contexts like the other types
        - For Example, you cannot define a pointer to `void` or use `void` to define a field in a `struct`
        - `Array` Variables cannot be assigned to other array variables.
    - Examples of lack of orthogonality in Java:
        - There are two type categories in Java: `primitive` and `user-defined` (class types)
        - There is no mechanism that allow the creation of primitive types
    - Most of the times PL designers trade-off orthogonality for efficiency
    - Also, too much orthogonality can negatively influence writability if unforeseen combinations of constructs lead to code absurdities hard to be detected by the compiler
- `Data Types`:
    - As mentioned before, a data type defines a collection of data values and a set of predefined operations on those values
    - Lack of types for commonly used values certainly impacts a PL readability, writability, and reliability.
- `Syntax Design`:
    - Syntax is the form while semantic is the meaning
    - in a well designed PL, semantics should follow directly from syntax
    - Example:
        - `static` in C has different semantics depending on the context of its appearance.
            - If used inside a function it means that a variable is to be defined at compile time (in contrast with `auto` variables)
            - If used outside all functions it means that a variable shall not be exported from the file where it was created.
    - The words chosen to be included in a PL grammar directly affect its readability
    - For example, most PL use the same set of words to represent common statements, such as `if`, `while`, `for`, etc.
    - Another important PL design choice refers to the mechanisms used to define compound statements
    - Some PLs use matching pair of special words or symbols to form groups
    - Others use braces (Java) or tabs (Python)
- `Expressivity`:
    - Computations can be expressed using powerful operators
    - It measures how simple it is to express an idea (write a program) using a PL
- `Type Checking`:
    - Testing for type errors in a given program, either by the compiler or during program execution.
    - Example:
        - Early versions of the original language didnt require parameters to functions to be type checked.
        - An `int` could be passed to a function that expected a `float`, with unpredictable results (see Ariane 5 Explosion)
- `Exception Handling`:
    - The ability of a program to intercept run-time errors and take corrective measures
    - This features is common in most languages today, but other languages, such as C, don't provide explicit mechanism for exception handling
- `Aliasing`:
    - The ability to use distinct names to refer to the same memory location.
    - It can be dangerous because it can lead to erros dificult to trace, making the PL less reliable.
    - Example:
        - > 1 reference to an object
---





