 # <div style="text-align: right"> February 5, 2020</div>

 ### Agenda
 - PL Evalutation (cont.)
 - Context-sensitive Grammars
 - Lexical Analyzer
 ### Homework:
- Worksheet 2
---
 ## I. Backys-Naur Form (BNF)
- Data Types:
    - as mentioned before, a data type defines a collection of data values and set of predefined operations on those values.
    - Lack of types for commonly used values certainly impacts a PL readability, writability, and reliability.
- Syntax Design:
    - Syntax is the form while semantic is the meaning
    - In a well designed PL, semantics should follow directly from syntax.
    - `static` in C has different semantics depending on the context of its appearance
        - If used inside a functions it means that a variable is to be defined a compile time (in contrast with `auto` variables)
        - If used outside all functions it means that a variable shall not be exported from the file where it was crated.
- Expressifity:
    - computations can be expressed using powerful operators
    - It measures how ismple it is to express an idea (write a program) using a PL
---
## II. Lexical Analyzer:
- Read the characters of the source code and identify `lexical units` (also called `lexemes`)
- `Lexical Units` are logical groups of characters that have some syntax relevance.
- The Lexical analyzer is also responsible for adding a new identifiers found to the symbol table. 
- Common Types of Lexical Units:
    - Keywords (reserved words)
    - Identifiers
    - Literals
    - Operators
    - Punctuators (commas, colons, semicolons, periods, etc.)
    - Delimiters (parenthesis, brackets, braces, quotes, etc.)
- Lexical Units are classified into categories called `tokens`
- getChar(input)
    - reads the next char from input and returns its class (EOF, letter, digit, operator, punctuator, quote, blank, or other)
    - Note that getChar does NOT advance the input.
- addChar(input, lexeme)
    - adds the next char from input to lexeme, advancing the input by one char
- getNonBlank(input)
    - calls getChar and addChar until it returns a non-blank
- lex(input)
    - returns the next (lexeme, token) pair of None if EOF is reached.
    


