# <div style="text-align: right"> February 10, 2020</div>

### Agenda:
- Syntax Analyzer

### Homework:
- Homework #3
    - Write a program in Python for a Lexical Analyzer
### Quiz Questions:
1. Howm any tokens do you think a typical lexical analyzer would recognize in "if(a == 5)"
    - answer = 6
2. How do you think a typical lexical analyzer would react when working on a statement like: ") if 5 (== a"
    - answer = It will work just fine and will be up to the parser to determine if the expression is syntactically correct or not.
3. The lexical analyzer code discussed in class had a function that would read the input without "consuming" the next character. What was the name of the function?
    - answer = getChar()
---
## I. The Syntax Analyzer
- Reads the `lexical units` identified by the lexical analyzer and builds the `parse tree`.
- The `syntax analyzer` (also called the `parser`) uses the productions of the language's grammar to verify if the code is syntactically correct
- Two Approaches:
    - Top-Down
    - Bottom-Up
- The Top-Down Parser:
    - THe process begins with the grammar's start symbol (the root of the parse tree)
    - At each iteration the parser tries to determine which production to apply in order to get closer to the word to be generated.
    - Consider a scenario where the current derivation is `xAalpha` and A rules available are:
    ```
        A --> a | bB | cBc
    ```
    - How can a top-down parser decide which rule to apply?
    - If next token is:
    ```
        a, apply A --> a
        b, apply A --> bB
        c, apply A --> cBc
    ```
    - that only worked because all 3 rules were right recursive productions.
    - Removing left recursive productions:
    ```
        Group A-rules as A --> Aaplha | ... | Aalpha | Beta1 | ... | Beta
        Replace A-Rules wiht:
        A --> Beta1Alpha' | ... | BetanAlpha'
        A' --> AlphaA' | ... | AlphamA' | epsilon
    ```
    - Example:
        - Replace the left recursive production below:
    ```
        E --> E + T | T
        E --> TE'
        E' --> +TE' | epsilon
    ```
    - The Recursive-Descent Parsing Process:
        - A top-down parser implementation
        - Consists of a Collection of subprograms, many of which are recursive, and it produces a parse tree in top-down order.
        - A recursive-descent parser has a subprogram for each nonterminal in its associated grammar.

