# <div style="text-align: right">Principles of Programming Languages - February 26, 2020</div>
### Agenda:
-
### Homework:
- Assignment 2
---
## I. Data Types
- A collection of data values and a set of predefined operations on those values.
- PLs must support an appropriate collection of data types and structures to match the objects in the real world
- Data Types can be classified into:
    - Scalar Types:
        - They can only hold one piece of information at a time
        - Examples:
            1. int
            2. float
            3. boolean
    - Structured (compound) types
        - They are made of multiple scalar values
        - Examples:
            1. Arrays
            2. Lists
            3. Tuples
            4. Dictionaries
    - Primitive Types
        - Data types that are not defined in terms of other types
        - Nearly all PLs provide a set of primitive data types
        - Examples:
            1. Integer
            2. Float-point
            3. Boolean
            4. Character
---
## II. Primitive Data Types
- Integer:
    - Most integer types are directly supported by the hardware
    - Most computers use two's complement to store negatie integers
- Floating-Point:
    - Again, PLs rely heavily on representations supported by the hardware
    - Most will use the IEEE 754 standard to represent float (single precision) and double (double precision) values.
    - Some PLs (COBOL, SQL, C#, etc.) designed to support business applications implement the decimal type that can be used to store a fixed number of decimal digits.
    - Decimal however is not suitable to represent large floating-point numbers and they take much more storage comparted to floating-point.
- Boolean Types:
    - The simplest of all types
    - only two possible values 
        - True
        - False
    - Most PLs support the boolean type
    - Curiosity:
        - C until 89's version didnt have a boolean type (zero was false, non-zero was true)
- Arrays
    - An homogeneous aggregate of data elements in which an individual element is identified by its position in the aggregate, relative to the first element.
    - All elements must be of the same type
    - Reference to individual array elements are specified using subscript expressions.
    - Another important characteristic of arrays refers to ow they are implemented.
    - Arrays (different than lists) are stored using contiguous memory locations
    - Therefore, arrays provide an efficient sequential access an costly insert and delete operations.
    - Most PLs use [ ] for array indexing
    - PL/I, Fortrain, and Ada are some of the few exceptions, using () instead
    - That has implications on readability
    - Design Issues:
        - What tpyes are legal for array subscripts?
            - Often only integer is accepted
        - Are array subscripts range checked and what happens if an array is wrongly indexed?
        - What is the range of an array?
        - Is slicing allowed?
        - Arrays can have fixed sizes or not
        - "static arrays" are synonym of fixed size arrays, while "dynamic arrays" are arrays that can grown in size
        - Those refer to the *subscript value range* binding
        - When it comes to *storage* binding, arrays can be statically allocated, stack or heap allocated.
    - For example, in C arrays always have fixed sizes (static arrays)
    - If they are declared using `static` they are also statically allocated
    - However, if`static` is not used they are allocated in the stack
    - if `new` is used, the array is created in the heap.
    - In Java, arrays can be static or dynamic in relation to the subscription range binding.
    - For example, the **ArrayList** class implements an array with varying sizes (dynamic array)
    - Subscripting is not supported for dynamic arrays though (you have to use `get` and `set` methods)
    - As for the storage binding, `ArrayList` elements are always reference variables with objects allocated in the heap.
    - Typical Array operations:
        - Assignement
        - Size (or length)
        - Concatenation
        - Slicing
    - Implementing arrays requires cnsiderably more compile-time effort than does implementing primitive types.
    - Array descriptors have to maintain much more information for examples
    - Examples:
```python=
// a statically allocated array
static int x[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
    printf("%d ", x[i]);
}
printf("\n");


// a stack allocated array
int y[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
    print("%d ", y[i]);
}
printf("/n");


// a heap allocated array
int *z = new int[5];
z[0] = 1; z[1] = 2, z[2] = 3, z[3] = 4; z[4] = 5;
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
    printf("%d ", z[i]);
}
printf("\n");
```
- Associative Arrays
    - An unordered collection of data elements that are indexed by an equal number of values called keys
    - Associative arrays are often called maps, hashses, or dictionaries
    - Examples:
```python 
students = {1: "John", 2: "Mary", 3: "Zack"}
print(students[2])
for id in students:
    print(students[id])
```
```java 
Map<Integer, String> studnets = new HashMap<Integer, String>() {
    { 
        put(1, "John");
        put(2, "Mary");
        put(3, "Zack");
    }
};
System.out.println(students.get(1));
For (integer id : students.keySet())
    System.out.println(Students.get(id));
```
- Lists
    - Lists are ordered aggregate of data elements
    - Lists can be homogeneous or heterogeneous, depending on whether the elements are of the same type or not.
    - Different that arrays, list are implemented as linked lists and the location of the elements are not guaranteed to be at contiguous memory locations.
    - Therefore, lists can grow/shrink easily as insert and delete operations are implemented efficiently
    - List Comprehension:
        - Describes a notation of a list in terms of the elements of another list.
        - Syntax in Python(`if` conditon is optional):
        - `expression for iterate_var in list if condition`
    - Examples:
```python
futis = ["orange", "banana", "apple"]
print(fruits[1]) # prints banana
for fruit in fruits:
    print(fruit)
```
```python
fruits = ["orange", "banana", "apple"]
print([len(fruit) for fruit in fruits if len(fruit) > 5])

# prints [6, 6]
```
```java
List<String> fruits = new LinkedList<String>(){
    {
        add("orange");
        add("banana");
        add("apple");
    }
};
System.out.println(fruits.get(1)); // prints banana
for (string fruit : fruits)
    System.out.println(fruit);
```
- Arrays or Lists?
    - Don't be misguided by the names used by PLs
    - For Example:
        - What Python calls "list" is technically a dynamic array (similar to Java's `ArrayList`)
    - Deque is the actual Python's implementation of a linked list
---
## III. Records
- An aggregate of data elements in which the individual elements are idntified by names and accessed through offsets from the beginning of the structure.
- Example (in C):
```
Struct Student {
    int id;
    char name[50];
};

int main() {
    struct Student s1, s2, s3:
    s1.id = 1; strcpy(s1.name, "John");
    s2.id = 2; strcpy(s2.name, "Mary");
    s3.id = 3; strcpy(s3.name, "Zack");
    printf("%d - %s", s1.id, s1.name);
}
```
- Tuples
    - Similar to records, except that the elements are not named
    - Example (in Python):
```python 
s1 = (1, "John")
s2 = (2, "Mary")
s3 = (3, "Zack")
students = [s1, s2, s3]
for id, name in students:
    print(str(id) + ": " + name)
```
---
## IV. Pointers & References
- Pointer tpyes have values that consist of memory addresses or a special value (nil or null)
- The special value nil/null is not a valid address and is used to indicate that a pointer cannot be used to reference a memory cell.
- There are two types of opertations that can be performed with pointers:
    - Assignement, which sets a pointer variable's value to some address
    - Dereferencing, which retrieves the value of the entity that the pointers is referencing to.
- Pointers give the programmer a lot of flexibility but must be used with great care to avoid to potential problems:
    - Dangling pointers and 
    - Memory Leaks
- Dangling Pointers:
    - A pointer that contains the address of a variable that has be deallocated
    - Dangling pointers are harmful because they can be used to reference something completely different and to unintentionally modify other data areas.
- Memory Leaks:
    - Memory Leak happens when a pointer is assigned to a new value before the previously allocated area be freed.
- References are similar to pointers, with one important and fundamental difference:
    - References always refer to an object or a value in memory.
```C++
struct Student s;
s.id = 1; strcpy(s.name, "John");

struct Student *p;
p = &s; // assignment

printf("address of s is %p\n", p);
printf("%d - %s\n", (*p).id, (*p).name); // dereferencing
```
---
## V. Semantic Analysis
- Extract types and other Information from the program
- Check the language **rules** that go beyond the grammar.
- Assign storage locations for variables
- Language **rules** examples:
    - Variable used before being declared or outside scope
    - Variable already defined in the scope
    - Type checking in function calls and expressions
- BNF or the formal grammar mechanisms discussed so far are not sufficient to describe semantic rules
- The normal approach is to define semantic rules using "attribute grammars"
- Attribute Grammars:
    - Attributes are added to the grammar non-terminal symbols
    - The attributes are used when specifying semantic rules
